Add "Objective-C Implementations in Swift" proposal (#2408)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/NNNN-objc-implementation.md

# Objective-C implementations in Swift

* Proposal: [SE-NNNN](NNNN-objc-implementation.md)
* Authors: [Becca Royal-Gordon](https://github.com/beccadax)
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status: **Awaiting implementation** (but only of resilience support)
* Implementation: In main and release/6.0, behind the `ObjCImplementation` experimental feature flag

> * Upcoming Feature Flag: `ObjCImplementation`

Reviewer: Remove Upcoming Feature Flag per https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-3-objective-c-implementations-in-swift/71315/12

An `@objc @implementation extension` can contain four kinds of members:

1. **Open, public, package, or internal `@objc` members** must be member implementations. Swift will give you an error if they don't match a member from the imported headers, so it will diagnose typos and mismatched Swift names.
2. **Fileprivate or private `@objc` members** are helper methods (think `@IBAction`s or callback selectors). They must *not* match a member from the imported headers, but they are accessible from Objective-C by performing a selector or declaring them in a place that is not visible to Swift.
3. **Members with a `final` modifier (or `@nonobjc` on an initializer)** are Swift-only and can use Swift-only types or features. These may be Swift-only implementation details (if `internal` or `private`) or Swift-only APIs (if `public` or `package`).

> 4. **Members with an `override` modifier** override superclass members and function normally.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it's worth a brief couple sentences justifying these rules. It's not immediately obvious why each one exists (IMO (1) and (3) are especially non-obvious, I'm not confident I could articulate the exact motivation).

Author: The way I came up with to handle this is to treat category 1 (member implementations) separately from the other three and give an explicit justification for allowing each of the other three categories.

```suggestion
Specifically, member implementations must be non-`final`, not be overrides, and have an `open`, `public`, `package`, or `internal` access level. Every member implementation must match a member declared in the Objective-C header, and every member declared in the Objective-C header must have a matching member implementation. This ensures that everything declared by the header is correctly implemented without any accidental misspellings or type signature mismatches.

In addition to member implementations, an `@objc @implementation` extension can also contain three other kinds of members:

1. **Fileprivate or private non-`final` members** are helper methods (think `@IBAction`s or callback selectors). They must *not* match a member from the imported headers, but they are accessible from Objective-C by performing a selector or declaring them in a place that is not visible to Swift. (Objective-C `@implementation` blocks often declare private members like this, so it's helpful to allow them in `@objc @implementation` extensions too.)

2. **Members with an `override` modifier** override superclass members and function normally. (Again, Objective-C `@implementation` blocks often override superclass members without declaring the override in their headers, so it's helpful to allow `@objc @implementation` extensions to do the same.)

3. **Members with a `final` modifier (or `@nonobjc` on an initializer)** are Swift-only and can use Swift-only types or features. These may be Swift-only implementation details (if `internal` or `private`) or Swift-only APIs (if `public` or `package`). (This feature is necessary to support stored properties containing Swift-only types because ordinary extensions cannot declare stored properties; in theory, we could require other `final` members to be declared in a separate ordinary extension, but we also allow them in an `@objc @implementation` extension as a convenience.)
```

```swift
@objc @implementation extension SomeClass {
    // Equivalent to `@implementation SomeClass`;
    // implements everything in `@interface SomeClass` and
    // all `@interface SomeClass ()` extensions.
}

@objc(SomeCategory) @implementation extension SomeClass {
    // Equivalent to `@implementation SomeClass (SomeCategory)`;
    // implements everything in `@interface SomeClass (SomeCategory)`.
}
```

As in any `@objc extension`, all members are implicitly `@objc` by default, and all `@objc` members are implicitly `dynamic`; unlike other `@objc extension`s, adding the `final` keyword makes the declaration *not* `@objc` by default.

As a special exception to the usual rule, an `@objc @implementation extension` which implements the main Objective-C interface of a class can declare stored properties, designated and required `init`s, and `deinit`s.

#### Rules

An `@objc @implementation extension` must:

> * Extend a non-root class imported from Objective-C which does not use lightweight generics.

Reviewer 2: Is this really 'non-root'? Or is it 'subclass of `NSObject`?

Author: The rule the compiler enforces is "non-root". This is the same rule enforced for `@objc` classes—the type checker permits you to subclass `NSProxy`, for instance. (I can't guarantee that these subclasses *work*, although I don't know of a reason why they wouldn't.)

* If a category name is present, match a category by that name for that class (if no category name is present, the extension matches the main interface).

> * Not declare conformances. (Conformances should be declared in the header if they are for Objective-C protocols, or in an ordinary extension otherwise.)

Reviewer 2: W/r/t the rules for which members can appear in an `@objc @implementation extension` I think it might be good to contrast why we don't adopt a similar philosophy here and say that anything which isn't part of the implemented interface should be in a regular extension

Author: The explanation for this one is a little involved, so I'm adding an entry to Alternatives Considered.

#### Rules

A member implementation must:

* Have the same Swift name as the member it implements.
* Have the same selector as the member it implements.
* Have the same foreign error convention and foreign async convention as the member it implements.
* Not have other traits, like an overload signature, `@nonobjc`/`final` attribute, `class` modifier, or mutability, which is incompatible with the member it implements.
* Not have `@_spi` attributes (they would be pointless since the visibility of the imported Objective-C attribute is what will make the member usable or not).

Both the Swift name and the Objective-C selector of a member implementation must match the corresponding Objective-C declaration; Swift will diagnose an error if one matches but the other doesn't. This checking respects both the `@objc(custom:selector:)` in Swift implementations and the Swift name (`NS_SWIFT_NAME(custom(_:name:))`) attribute in Objective-C headers.

> Member implementations must have an overload signature that closely matches the Objective-C declaration’s. However, types that are non-optional in the Objective-C declaration may be implicitly unwrapped optionals in the member implementation if this is ABI-compatible; this is because Objective-C does not prevent clients from passing `nil` or implementations from returning `nil` when `nonnull` is used, and member implementations may need to implement backwards compatibility logic for this situation.

Reviewer 2: Is there a different proposal which spells out the rules in more detail that we could link to? Or is this really the only difference of note?

Author: This is the only difference. Basically, the type match must be as close as a protocol witness would be, *except* that IUOs can be used in place of non-optional types if the two types would have exactly the same ABI.

### Objective-C metadata generation

When Swift generates metadata for an `@objc @implementation extension`, it will generate metadata that matches what clang would have generated for a similar `@implementation`. That is:

* `@objc` members will only have Objective-C metadata, not Swift metadata. (`final` members may require Swift metadata.)
* If the extension is for the main class interface, it will generate complete Objective-C class metadata with an ivar for each stored property, and without setting the Swift bit or using any features incompatible with clang subclasses or categories.

## Source compatibility

> These changes is additive and doesn't affect existing code. Replacing an Objective-C `@implementation` declaration with a Swift `@objc @implementation extension` is invisible to the library's Objective-C and Swift clients, so it should not be source-breaking unless the implementations have observable behavior differences.

Reviewer 2: "These changes are" or "This change is"

> **Note**: Some of the required runtime changes are in the Objective-C runtime, so even a snapshot toolchain will not be sufficient to actually run modules with affected classes. However, you can test the diagnostics and code generation by compiling with the experimental feature flag `ObjCImplementationWithResilientStorage`; OS version 99.99 will be treated as high enough to have the necessary runtime support.

## Future directions

### Extending `@objc` capabilities to extend `@objc @implementation` capabilities

`@implementation` cannot create declarations that aren't supported by `@objc`. The most notable limitations include:

* Free functions, global variables, cases of `NS_TYPED_ENUM` typedefs, and other non-member Objective-C declarations.
* Global declarations imported as members of a type using `NS_SWIFT_NAME`'s import-as-member capabilities.
* Factory convenience initializers (those implemented as class methods, like `+[NSString stringWithCharacters:length:]`).
* `__attribute__((objc_direct))` methods and `@property (direct)` properties.
* Members with nonstandard memory management behavior, even if it is correctly annotated.

> * Members which deviate from the Objective-C error convention in certain subtle ways, such as by having the `NSError**` parameter in the wrong place.

Reviewer 2: I think some of these are different-in-kind and deserve mention in the main proposal text. Namely, those members that would appear in an Objective-C `@interface` block but which can't be implemented by `@implementation` deserve to be a bit more front and center (seems like that would be factory inits, direct members, nonstandard memory management, and error convention mismatches).

Author: I've added this note to the "Member Implementations" section:

> Some members cannot be implemented in an `@objc @implementation` extension because `@objc` does not support some of the features they use; see "Future Directions" for more specific discussion of this. These members will have to be moved to a separate category and implemented in Objective-C.

And I've also split the list in future directions in two, with the members of `@interface`s listed separately from the global members. (That's basically the same division you suggested.)

The compiler currently has experimental support for `@_cdecl @implementation` for global functions; it's behind a separate experimental feature flag because it's not part of this proposal.

### `@implementation` for C++ declarations

One could similarly imagine a C++ version of this feature:

```cpp
// C++ header file

class CppClass {
private:
    int myStorage = 0;
public:
    int someMethod() { ... }
    int swiftMethod();
};
```

```swift
// Swift implementation file

@_expose(Cxx) @implementation extension CppClass {
    func swiftMethod() -> Int32 { return self.myStorage }
}
```

This would be tricker than Objective-C interop because for Objective-C interop, Swift already generates machine code thunks directly in the binary, whereas for C++ interop, Swift generates C++ source code thunks in a generated header. Swift could either compile this generated code internally, or it could emit it to a file and expect the build system to build and link it.

We believe that there wouldn't be a problem with sharing the `@implementation` attribute with this feature because `@implementation` is always paired with a language-specific attribute

### Supporting lightweight generics

> Objective-C's "lightweight generics" behave in rather janky ways in Swift extensions, so we have banned them in this initial document. If there’s demand for implementing Objective-C generic classes in Swift, we may want to extend this feature to support them.

Reviewer 2: "rather janky" feels.. a bit flippant for an evolution proposal :)

Author: ```suggestion
Classes using Objective-C lightweight generics have type-erased generic parameters; this imposes a lot of tricky limitations on Swift extensions of these classes. Since very few classes use lightweight generics, we have chosen to ban the combination for now. If there turns out to be a lot of demand for implementing Objective-C generic classes in Swift, we can lift the ban after we've figured out how to make the combination more usable.
```
